w---
layout: category
title: Who Doesn't Love D-Branes and Anomalies?
categories: week
excerpt_separator:  <!--more-->
---

String theory (and indeed AdS/CFT) in itself is a huge vortex that one gets sucked into, so I am cautious about spending too much time there - besides, there is something entirely unsatisfying about learning something at the pinnacle of physics research as AdS/CFT from distilled lecture notes without a sufficiently strong background in strings, and indeed, an appreciation of other fields of HEP. That said, I am very fond of D-brane dynamics. 

- Gauge theories: both from the point of view of constrained dynamics à la Henneaux and Teitelboim as well as phenomenological aspects. The former is elegant and powerful, the latter is so far-reaching it's ridiculous. This is supplemented bvy Tong's *TASI Lectures on Solitons* which are possibly my favourite lectures of all time - wonderfully and cleanly presented, with applications in string theory. I now love D3 brane stacks and want to explore D-brane bound states (I am of course defaulting to the D-brane bible by Clifford Johnson) as well as D-brane wrapping and (**choral sounds**) K-theoretic classification of RR charges on D-branes.
- Anomalies: lots of modern viewpoints here - the Atiyah-Singer index theorem, the Dai-Freed theorem, descent equations, Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation. Four references in particular stood out: *Dai-Freed Anomalies in Particle Physics* (with spectral sequences and homology!), *TASI Lectures on Anomalies*, a lightning review culminating in M-theory anomalies, *Anomalies in Quantum Field Theory* by Serone (which had a nice review of SQM and the descent equations) and *Lectures on Anomalies* by Bilal (the Weinberg of sorts)
- AdS3/CFT2: rather than jumping straight to 5 dimensions, I thought I would dip my toes in its (much more concrete) 3-dimensional cousin. Naturally, this led to the conformal bootstrap, minimal models and Verma modules. Something which I would *really* like to know about is the CS/WZW correspondence, but the only good source is currently nLab, I am yet to picture what a "circle 3-bundle" is. I am also delving into the renormalisation group properly: statements like "a QFT is just an effective field theory on an RG flow between two CFTs in the IR and the UV" are super-intriguing
- Like I said - rather than learning string theory proper, I have lately preferred to learn about *ideas* that are perhaps better grounded in string theory, but have wide implications in ordinary super-Yang Mills, for example: Montonen-Olive duality, as well as compactifications. To anyone learning string theory: I suggest you drop Becker, Becker, Schwarz *now*. It's downright impossible to learn *any* actual string theory properly from it, save for the big picture. It seems like it would probably be the best "summary" book as a reference to people who are already experts, but I would not recommend learning from it for the first time.
- In mathematics (if you don't count most of the previous stuff as mathematics), I've really just been reading up on physics-motivated algebraic geometry and algebraic topology (AT II on MIT CourseWare is very well written)
